Concept-Based Curriculum Unit
The Art of Fantasy: How To Create a
Unit Title: Subject: English Language Arts
World of Make Believe
Conceptual
Story Elements/Fantasy Teacher(s): Evita Flock
Lens:
Grade Level: 5 Duration: 6-7 Weeks
Unit overview: Readers of fantasy step into worlds of magic and make believe. Readers enjoy getting lost in these
worlds and playing along with the authors’ game of ‘What if this could happen?’ However, have you ever wondered
how authors create these magical worlds? Over the next several weeks, you will investigate story elements through
the genre of fantasy:
How do fantasy authors create a setting?
How do fantasy authors develop characters?
How do fantasy authors build a quest?
How do fantasy authors plan for symbolism?
By the end of the unit, you will have created your own fantasy world. Let’s pick up our pens and begin to create our
own worlds of make believe.
Notes for teachers:
This unit is a genre study. It is taught at the end of the year, which means generalizations around concepts such as
theme have been explored earlier in the year, and now students are building upon those understandings.
To support the unit, students engage in fantasy book clubs. Students are encouraged to read their books during
independent reading time and at home. Their books will be used often during the transfer stage of inquiry in which
students have formed an understanding, and they are testing it in other contexts. Each book club will read a different
book. This is not the students’ first experience with book clubs, and therefore previous generalizations support how
students work together in their groups.
Fifth graders often love fantasy and are very excited by the opportunity to create their own fantasy world. As this is
an end-of-the-year unit, it is meant to be fun and creative. For the summative assessment, students will engage in the
planning phase of writing. Students will learn to sketch note in order to focus on creating a fantasy world and the
characters that live in it. Students will not participate in a full writing process, but some students may elect to write
their stories over the summer.
Standards:
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.2 CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.3
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.3 CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.5
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.5 CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.9
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.7 CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.5.10
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.5.9
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.SL.5.1
CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.SL.5.2
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning updated 2022 French & Marschall
Ths unit was originally published in Concept-Based Literacy Lessons: Designing Learning that Ignites
Understanding and Transfer, Grades 4-10 (Lanning, Brown, 2019) This version is updated by Brown 2022
Unit Web
Understanding Text
Responding to Text
● Elements of Fantasy
● Active Listening
● Magical vs. Realistic Details
● Book Talks
● Character Traits (Protagonist’s
● Readers Response
Flaws/Antagonist’s Redemption)
● Questions (Drawing out deeper
● Signposts of Learning
understanding)
● Archetypes
● Connections (Drawing connections across
● Setting (Magical Worlds)
details in the text, text-to-text, text-to-self)
● External/Internal Quest
● Metaphors/Symbols
● Theme
● Made-Up Vocabulary of Fantasy Authors
Unit Title:
The Art of Fantasy:
How To Create a World of Make Believe
Conceptual Lens:
Story Elements/Fantasy
Producing Text
Critiquing Text
● Story Mapping
● Believability: Creating a Fantasy World
● Graphic Organizers (Compare and
● Relatability: Protagonist/Antagonist
Contrast, Cause and Effect, Webs,
● Text Analysis
Timelines)
● Word Choice: Tone/Setting
● Visual Representation
● Text Evidence
● Sketch Notes
● Author’s Craft Techniques
● Draw Conclusions/Evaluation
● Judgment of Characters
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Generalizations and Guiding Questions
Guiding Questions
Generalizations
Z=Concept Formation, F=Factual, C=Conceptual, D=Debatable
U1. Fantasy stories blend magical and 1a. Should all details in a fantasy story be magical? (D)
realistic details to make a story 1b.What details from the story are magical? (F)
believable. 1c. What details from the story are realistic? (F)
1d. What would the story be like if all the details were magical? (F)
1e. Why do fantasy stories include both magical and realistic details? (C)
U2. Visual representations (story 2a. How does this graphic organizer help you? (F)
mapping, graphic organizers and 2b. What sketchnote tip did you use? (F)
sketchnotes) help readers and writers 2c. How does the visual representation help you understand the text? (F)
to organize details and draw 2d How did the sketchnotes help you understand the text? (F)
conclusions. 2e. How do visual representations (story maps, graphic organizers and sketchnotes)
support readers? (C)
U3. In literature discussions, active 3a. What is text analysis? (Z)
listening and questioning lead 3b. How can you be an active listener during a literature discussion? (F)
readers to deep text analysis. 3c. What did you learn about the book while actively listening? (F)
3d. What type of questions lead to discussions? (F)
3e. What did you learn about the book through these questions?(F)
3f. How does active listening and questioning contribute to literature discussions? (C)
3g. Is it possible to gain as much from a book by reading it alone as opposed to in a
book club? (D)
U4. Authors reveal magical worlds 4a. How did the character(s) enter the magical world? (F)
through characters, settings and 4b. What is the primary setting? (F)
unrealistic details. 4c. What details show that the setting is unrealistic? (F)
4d. How do authors reveal magical worlds to readers? (C)
U5. Authors show readers when a 5a. What are signposts in literature? (Z)
protagonist learns a lesson through 5b. What lesson is the protagonist learning? (F)
signposts (eg. Tough Questions, 5c. How did the author signal to readers that the protagonist is learning a lesson?(F)
Words of the Wiser, Memory 5d. How do authors typically show readers that a protagonist is learning a lesson?(C)
Moments).
U6. Readers suspend judgment of 6a. Is it better to judge someone based upon a first impression or suspend judgment?
characters and evaluate text evidence (D)
from across a book to draw 6b. What are positive and negative character traits? (Z)
conclusions about characters. 6c. What positive or negative character trait does the character first demonstrate? (F)
6d. What text evidence supports the character trait? (F)
6e. What is your first impression of the character? (F)
6f. How has your opinion of the character changed over the course of the book? (F)
6g. How do readers draw conclusions about characters in a book? (C)
U7: Readers examine external and 7a. What is the external quest in _____? (F)
internal quests to help determine 7b. What is the goal of the quest in ____? (F)
themes in fantasy books. 7c. What are typical goals of a quest in a fantasy book? (C)
7d. What is the difference between an internal and external quest? (Z)
7e. What is the internal quest in ___? (F)
7f. What does the internal quest show about the author’s message? (F)
7g. Why do readers examine external and internal quests? (C)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Generalizations and Guiding Questions
Guiding Questions
Generalizations
Z=Concept Formation, F=Factual, C=Conceptual, D=Debatable
U8. Readers draw connections 8a. Why do you think ____ is a symbol? (F)
between symbols to help determine a 8b. How do readers find symbols in a book? (C)
theme. 8c. What does the symbol, ___, represent? (F)
8d. How do the symbols in ____ connect to one another? (F)
8e. What theme do the symbols suggest? (F)
8f. Why is drawing connections between symbols important? (C)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Knowledge and Skills
Knowledge Skills
Students will know… Students will be able to...
Understanding Text Understanding Text
K1: Examples of Magical and Realistic ✓ S1: RL 5.2. Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem ✓
Elements (eg. characters and objects) from details in the text, including how characters in a
story or drama respond to challenges or how the
K2: Typical Settings in Fantasy Books ✓ speaker in a poem reflects upon a topic; summarize the
text.
K3: Signposts of learning for the ✓
protagonist and reader (eg. Source: Notice
S2: RL 5.9. Compare and contrast stories in the same ✓
and Note by Beers and Probst-Tough
genre (e.g., mysteries and adventure stories) on their
questions, Words of the Wiser, Memory
approaches to similar themes and topics.
Moments, etc.)
K4: Examples of Character Traits ✓
Responding to Text
K5: Typical Goals of an External Quest in ✓
S3: SL5.1. Engage effectively in a range of collaborative ✓
Fantasy Books
discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacherled) with
diverse partners on grade 5 topics and texts, building on
K6: The Difference between an External ✓ others’ ideas and expressing their own clearly.
and Internal Quest a. Come to discussions prepared, having read or studied
required material; explicitly draw on that preparation
and other information known about the topic to explore
K7: Typical Symbols and their Meanings in ✓ ideas under discussion.
Fantasy Books b. Follow agreed-upon rules for discussions and carry
out assigned roles.
c. Pose and respond to specific questions by making
comments that contribute to the discussion and
Responding to Text
elaborate on the remarks of others.
d. Review the key ideas expressed and draw conclusions
K8: Discourse Protocols: Active Listening ✓
in light of information and
Techniques (Non-Verbal Cues,
knowledge gained from the discussions.
Paraphrasing the speaker, Ask for
clarification, etc.)
K9: Examples of questions that lead to ✓ S4: SL5.2 Summarize a written text read aloud or ✓
discussions (Character motivation, author’s information presented in diverse media or formats,
purpose, connections, etc.) including visually, quantitatively and orally.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Knowledge and Skills
Knowledge Skills
Students will know… Students will be able to...
Critiquing Text Critiquing Text
K10: Examples of Text Analysis (e.g. ✓ S5: RL5.3. Compare and contrast two or more characters, ✓
text-to-text connections, noting settings, or events in a story or drama, drawing on specific
details, determining the author’s details in the text (e.g., how characters interact).
purpose.)
S6: RL 5.5. Explain how a series of chapters, scenes, or stanzas ✓
K11: Examples of text evidence that ✓ fits together to provide the overall structure of a particular
readers use to determine character story, drama, or poem.
traits (e.g. character action, speech
and thoughts)
S7: RL5.7 Analyze how visual and multimedia elements ✓
contribute to the meaning, tone, or beauty of a text (e.g.,
graphic novel, multimedia presentation of fiction, folktale,
myth, poem).
Producing Text Producing Text
K12: Planning Stage: Sketchnote ✓ S8: W5.3. Write narratives to develop real or imagined ✓
Techniques experiences or events using effective technique, descriptive
details, and clear event sequences.
K13: The Purpose of Different ✓
Graphic Organizers (eg. Compare and
Contrast, Cause and Effect, Webs, S9: W5.5 With guidance and support from peers and adults, ✓
Timelines) develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning,
revising, editing, rewriting, or trying a new approach.
S10: W5.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts ✓
to support analysis, reflection, and research. a. Apply grade 5
Reading standards to literature (e.g., “Compare and contrast
two or more characters, settings, or events in a story or a
drama, drawing on specific details in the text [e.g., how
characters interact]”).
S11: W5.10 Write routinely over extended time frames (time ✓
for research, reflection, and revision) and shorter time frames
(a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of
discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Assessment
How will we know students have achieved the learning goals?
Summative Assessment Task(s) UKS Assessed
What: Students will explore the story elements of the fantasy genre… U2. Visual
representations (story
Why: in order to understand that … mapping, graphic
organizers and sketch
U2. Visual representations (story mapping, graphic organizers and sketch notes) help readers and
notes) help readers and writers to organize details and draw conclusions. writers to organize details
and draw conclusions.
U4. Authors reveal magical worlds through characters, settings and unrealistic
details. U4. Authors reveal
magical worlds through
U7. External and internal quests help reveal themes in fantasy books. characters, settings and
unrealistic details.
U8. Readers draw connections between symbols to help determine a theme.
U7. External and internal
How: quests help reveal themes
in fantasy books.
A) You have entered the fantasy worlds of several different authors. Perhaps
through your readings, you started to ask your own what-if questions. Perhaps U8. Readers draw
you started to imagine a slightly altered world that could be possible with a bit connections between
of magic. Using your understanding of how authors create fantasy worlds and symbols to help
Assessment Type your knowledge of sketchnoting, create your own fantasy world. You will need determine a theme.
and Task: to address the following story elements:
S8: Write narratives to
1. The type of setting and how magic is revealed in the fantasy world develop real or imagined
2. Characteristics of your protagonist, and how you will reveal their experiences or events
character traits using effective technique,
3. An external and internal quest descriptive details, and
4. Symbols that you intend to use to develop your theme clear event sequences.
B) After sketchnoting the story elements of your fantasy world, you will write S9: With guidance and
a reflection explaining how you demonstrated the target generalizations in support from peers and
your fantasy sketchnote. adults, develop and
strengthen writing as
1. What story elements helped you to develop your fantasy world? Or, in needed by planning,
other words, how did you reveal your magical world for your readers? revising, editing,
Share a specific example from your brainstorm that represents this rewriting, or trying a new
story element and explain what it added to your story. approach.
2. What symbols did you use to help develop the theme of your story?
Share examples from your story.
3. Overall, how did the process of representing your ideas visually help
you as a story creator?
Assessment Tool Co-Created Scoring Guide
(rubric,
checklist, etc.)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Unit Title: The Art of Fantasy: How To Create a World of Make Believe Conceptual Lens: Story Elements/Fantasy
Grade Level: 5
Scoring Guide
Meets and exceeds standard criteria plus…
4
Examples: Sketch notes include detailed representations of each story
element (e.g. Characters thoughts, words or actions, detailed
descriptions).
Standard
3
Highlight or check, if met.
Understanding
Reflection shows evidence of the target generalizations:
●
U2. Visual representations (story mapping, graphic organizers and sketch notes) help readers
and writers to organize details and draw conclusions.
●
U4. Authors reveal magical worlds through characters, settings and unrealistic details.
●
U7. External and internal quests help reveal themes in fantasy books.
●
U8. Readers draw connections between symbols to help determine a theme.
Content
●
Includes a typical fantasy setting
●
Includes positive and negative character traits
●
Includes an external quest goal
●
Includes typical symbols of fantasy
Process
●
Uses graphic organizers and visual representations to illustrate a plan for a fantasy world.
●
Includes basic written/visual details to express story elements (Setting, Characters, Quest and
Symbols)
●
Creates a fantasy setting that contains a balance of realistic and magical details
●
Articulates a clear sequence of events in the external and internal quest
●
Articulates clear connections between symbols and explains how these symbols suggest a theme
to readers
2
Meets 10/13 of the criteria in the standard.
1
Non-scorable or does not yet approach standard
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Assessment
How will we know students have achieved the learning goals?
Pre-Assessment Task(s) UKS Assessed
How do readers and writers use sketchnotes to express their ideas? U2: Visual representations
(story mapping, graphic
Assessment Type 1.) Readers Notebooks: Students will sketchnote in their Readers organizers and sketch
Notebook about the class read aloud.
and Task: notes) help readers and
writers to organize details
and draw conclusions.
Use a checklist to review sketchnotes and conference with individuals and S8: Write narratives to
small groups to assist with areas of growth and reinforce strengths. develop real or imagined
experiences or events using
effective technique,
descriptive details, and
Assessment Tool
clear event sequences.
(rubric,
checklist, etc.) S9: With guidance and
support from peers and
adults, develop and
strengthen writing as
needed by planning.
How do authors build fantasy worlds? U2. Visual representations
(story mapping, graphic
1.) Whole and small group discussions around concept formation and
Assessment Type organizers and sketch
generalizing about story elements in fantasy books.
notes) help readers and
and Task:
writers to organize details
and draw conclusions.
2.) Individual student generalizations captured in Readers Notebooks.
U4. Authors reveal magical
worlds through characters,
Capture student learning through anecdotal notes when listening in on
settings and unrealistic
conversations and reviewing the students’ Readers Notebooks. The teacher
details.
will follow up with students through strategic conferences. Aim to meet with
students once each week.
U7. External and internal
Assessment Tool quests help reveal themes
(rubric, in fantasy books.
checklist, etc.)
U8. Readers draw
connections between
symbols to help determine
a theme.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S11: Write Unit Introduction: Pre Assessment: Review
routinely over Readers Notebook entries
extended time If this is not in place already, take time to establish reading and anecdotal notes from
frames and shorter protocols: class discussions.
time frames for a ● Daily independent reading, goal setting, progress
range of monitoring, reader response, and discussion with Activate prior knowledge,
discipline-specific classmates prior to the start of the
tasks, purposes, ● Ongoing individual reading conferences with the teacher unit. Invite students to
and audiences. to focus on individual skill development share in Morning Meetings
about elements of fantasy:
S3: Engage
To begin activating students’ prior knowledge of make-believe What is your favorite
effectively in a
worlds, invite students to respond to the following question in a fantasy series? If you could
range of
Morning Meeting or write a journal entry in a Reader's Notebook: have a superpower, what
collaborative
“If you could add a magical element to the real word, what would would it be? If you could
discussions
you add?” add a magical element to
(one-on-one, in
the real world, what would
groups, and
Read aloud a fantasy chapter book which will serve as a case you add?
teacher-led) with
study for student inquiries. To begin, students will respond to an
diverse partners on
engaging reflection question that helps readers to empathize Optimize individual choice
grade 5 topics and
with the protagonist. Read the first few chapters aloud prior to and autonomy by inviting
texts, building on
starting the inquiries so that the class can revisit passages as case students to self-select a
others’ ideas and
studies throughout the unit. novel that interests them
expressing their
at their reading level.
own clearly.
Students will read a fantasy book in book clubs, which will serve
as another case study of the fantasy genre. Students will often use As needed, during
their book club book to transfer their understandings from their individual conferences,
generalizations. offer mastery oriented
feedback targeted to
BOOK SHOPPING: Provide students with the opportunity to go students’ individual
‘book shopping’ by displaying book sets around the classroom for strengths and areas for
students to peruse. growth.
Another option is to invite Students to engage in digital book
shopping. Create a Google Slide Show of book choices and links to
a synopsis. This can be a more subtle way to offer individual
students different choices based upon reading level.
After students have perused the books, each student submits a
sticky note with their top choices, and form the book clubs.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase Assessments
INQUIRY 1: An inquiry into the blending of magical and realistic Pre-Assessment: Take
details (3-4 Sessions) anecdotal notes from
student explanations
K1: Magical vs. SPECTRUM STATEMENTS (CBIA pg. 80): Students will explore three during the Spectrum
Realistic provocative statements from the debatable questions in the unit: Statements to gather
Elements 1.) All details in fantasy stories are magical. (U1) baseline data.
2.) I judge people based on a first impression. (U6)
3.) I learn more about a book when working in book clubs than During individual
when reading alone. (U3) conferences, offer
Create a class spectrum based upon agreement. The choices should mastery oriented
include Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Agree and Strongly Agree. Invite feedback targeted to
students to state their first opinions on an individual spectrum in their students’ individual
Reader's Notebooks. Then read each statement aloud and direct strengths and areas for
students to stand along the class spectrum. Students will defend their growth.
thinking and have an opportunity to change their minds during this
learning engagement and when students revisit the statements in the
respective inquiry.
FRAYER MODEL (CBIA pg. 112): GIve students a series of picture cards
made up of realistic and magical characters, objects and actions to sort
into categories. Students will sort the cards into examples and
nonexamples of ‘magical elements’. Students will then work in groups to Provide access to
write a definition of ‘magical elements’ and create a list of expert thinking
characteristics based upon the example and nonexample lists. through modeling with
a mentor text to help
ANNOTATE IT (CBIA pg. 190) The class will read a short picture book all students
together and annotate it for the following guiding questions: comprehend the
What details from the story are magical? (Q1a) questions in response
What details from the story are realistic? (Q1b) to a common text.
What would the event be like if all the details
were magical? (Q1c) Conduct a shared
S3: Engage reading to allow all
effectively in a Students will annotate another short fantasy story with a buddy in readers to access
range of response to the same guiding questions. Then invite students to share grade-level texts and
collaborative their results with another pair who read a different text and analyze the annotate them for
discussions similarities and differences. specific guiding
questions.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase Assessments
U1. Fantasy Invite Students to Generalize Assessment: Review
stories blend student
magical and Students respond to a conceptual guiding question to write a generalizations. (U1)
realistic details generalization: Why do fantasy stories include both magical and
to make a story realistic details? (Q1d) If students need
believable. additional support,
provide a sentence
U1. Fantasy stories blend magical and realistic details to
frame.
make a story believable.
Invite students to share their generalizations in smaller groups, discuss
commonly used concepts across their generalizations, and share a group
generalization with the class. The students will form a class
generalization and add it to an anchor chart that displays the
S2: Compare and generalizations of the unit.
contrast stories
in the same genre Invite students to STRESS TEST (CBIA pg. 246) the generalization
(e.g., mysteries during Fantasy Book Clubs. Students annotate their book club book by
and adventure marking passages with sticky notes using the same guiding questions:
stories) on their What details from the story are magical? (Q1a)
approaches to What details from the story are realistic? (Q1b)
similar themes What would the event be like if all the details
and topics. were magical? (Q1c)
Then in their book club students will determine if the generalization is
supported by their new case study.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
INQUIRY 2: An inquiry into role of visual representation for
readers and writers (Ongoing throughout Read Aloud)
NOTE: This is an ongoing inquiry explored through the read aloud with
transfer opportunities available during book club responses and in the
final assessment.
Purpose of Visual Representations:
Students will use visual representations to communicate story
elements of their own fantasy story in the final assessment. To support
students with this task students will review the purpose of graphic
organizers which was explored in an earlier unit and story mapping.
They will also explore a new concept/skill: Sketchnotes.
K12: Planning Sketchnoting can be used across subjects, but students will use it the Create an anchor chart
Stage: context of reading and writing. A bank of minilessons can be drawn to serve as a visible
Sketchnote from the author, Verbal to Visual on Youtube. A variety of aspects can record of student
Techniques be explored through these short video clips. As students learn about learning from mini
Sketchnotes, the class will maintain an anchor chart of sketchnote tips. lessons that students
S10: Draw can refer to before
evidence from Invite students to try out sketchnoting tips in their Readers Notebook starting a sketchnoting
literary or during each read aloud session. Prompting students with a guiding session. It also offers
informational question from the chapter(s) provides focus for students as they voice and choice so that
texts to support sketch. Some students will prefer to sketch as the teacher reads and students can focus on
analysis, others will want three or four minutes to capture their thinking different aspects of
reflection, and following the read aloud sessions. Then give students the opportunity sketchnoting that they
research. to share their ideas with a partner and select some to share with the are drawn to or that
entire class. best supports the
content of the read
Graphic Organizers have been explored in an earlier unit. They are aloud.
K13: The
also an aspect of sketchnoting and can be revisited as required. Invite
Purpose of
students to revisit them in a Gallery Walk. Students will view Formative
Different
templates of different graphic organizers and respond to the following Assessment: Review
Graphic
question: sketchnotes from read
Organizers
How does the graphic organizer organize information? (Q2a) aloud in Reader’s
Notebook.
NOTE: This learning experience would best precede a read aloud
session, in which students can then use a graphic organizer to
sketchnote.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
S7: Analyze how TRADING CARDS (CBIA pg. 176): Following read aloud sessions, Formative
visual and invite students to create a trading card for a sketchnote tip or Assessment: Monitor
multimedia elements graphic organizer. Students can respond to the following guiding student progress
contribute to the questions on each trading card: through observation of
meaning, tone, or How does the graphic organizer organize information? (Q2a) book club discussions
beauty of a text (e.g., What sketchnote tip did you use? (Q2b) and review of Reader’s
graphic novel, How does the visual representation help you understand the Notebook entries.
multimedia text? (Q2c) Provide individual
presentation of How did the sketchnotes help you understand the text? (Q2d) check-ins and support
fiction, folktale, during conferences.
myth, poem). Invite Students to Generalize
U2: Visual Once the students have completed several sketchnote sessions Assessment: Review
representations and revisited the use of graphic organizers in the context of student generalizations.
(Story mapping, fiction, invite students to write a generalization in response to the (U2)
graphic organizers conceptual question: How do visual representations (story
and sketchnotes) maps, graphic organizers and sketchnotes) support readers? Maximize generalization
help readers and (Q2e) and transfer by
writers to organize scaffolding the process
details and draw of generalization with a
U2. Visual representations (Story mapping, graphic
conclusions. graphic organizer or
organizers and sketchnotes) help readers and writers to
sentence frame.
organize details and draw conclusions.
S10: Draw evidence
from literary or Encourage multiple
informational texts This generalization can be applied during Fantasy Book Clubs. modes of expression
to support analysis, Encourage students to use visual representations to capture their through sharing ideas in
reflection, and ideas during independent reading and use their sketchnotes writing or through
research. during book clubs to discuss their ideas. In the reflection survey visuals
at the end of each discussion session, invite students to respond
to the reflection question: How did using visual representations
improve your literature discussion?
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
INQUIRY 3: An inquiry into the impact of active listening and
questioning techniques (Ongoing throughout Book Clubs)
K10: Examples TEXT ANALYSIS: While students will have written essential agreements Create an anchor chart
of Text Analysis within their book clubs earlier in the unit, this is an opportunity for to serve as a visible
(e.g. students to form a clear understanding of what they should discuss in record of examples of
Text-to-text their book clubs. Provide each book club with a role-playing card that text analysis, active
connections, models an example of text analysis. (Use a text that the whole class is listening techniques
Noting details, familiar with when creating the cards.) Each group will perform the role and question types
determining play for the class. The class can articulate how the students discussed the that students can refer
the author’s book in each role play and create an anchor chart. In a follow up learning to before each book
purpose.) engagement, invite students to repeat the activity, but with a new set of club.
role play cards. Then students will classify the role play scenarios as
examples and nonexamples. Invite students to respond to the guiding
question in their Reader’s Notebook: What is text analysis? (Q3a.) To
track important concepts, students will create a section for concept
definitions in their notebooks and create a concept word wall in the
classroom with class definitions.
K8: Discourse ACTIVE LISTENING SKILLS: Model active listening skills during the class
Protocols: discussion of the read aloud or play a clip of a strong book club
Active discussion. Students will observe skills and co-create a class anchor Promote
Listening chart for future reference during book club discussions. Using the understanding across
Techniques guiding questions below, students will discuss how active listening languages by allowing
during the discussion deepened their text analysis: students to
How can you be an active listener during a literature discussion?
translanguage.
(Q3b)
What did you learn about the book while actively listening? (Q3c)
Provide additional
language scaffolds to
QUESTIONING: Students will write three questions on sticky notes
assist students
K9: Examples during the class read aloud. Following the read aloud, the teacher will
communicating in the
of questions strategically group students with their questions. Groups will sort the
target language.
that lead to questions. Then invite students to discuss how they sorted their
discussions questions. Highlight a sort that illustrates the types of questions that lead
to discussions (often how and why type questions). Depending on
students’ initial sorts, the students can discuss their questions using the
guiding questions:
What type of questions led to discussions? (Q3d)
What did you learn about the book through these questions? (Q3e)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
S5: Compare and Book Clubs Reflections: Students write reflections following each Formative
contrast two or literature discussion in their book clubs. Through these reflections, assessment: Monitor
more characters, students will investigate the role of active listening and questioning by student progress
settings, or responding to the following questions: through observation of
events in a story How can you be an active listener during a literature discussion? book club discussions
or drama, (Q3b) and review of Reader’s
drawing on What did you learn about the book while actively listening? (Q3c) Notebook entries.
specific details in What type of questions lead to discussions? (Q3d) Provide individual
the text. What did you learn about the book through these questions?(Q3e) check-ins and support
during conferences.
U3. In literature Following several book club reflections, students will use a
discussions, generalization strategy called, Concept Roles (CBIA pg. 224) Students As needed, during
active listening will sit in small groups each with an important concept from the individual conferences,
and questioning inquiry (e.g. active listening, questioning, and text analysis). Students offer mastery oriented
techniques lead will take turns completing the sentence frame: “_________ is related to feedback targeted to
readers to deep __________ because…” students’ individual
text analysis. strengths and areas for
Invite Students to Generalize growth.
S3: Engage
effectively in a Once students have connected the important concepts, invite students Ensure accessibility
range of to independently write a generalization in response to the conceptual through vocabulary
collaborative question: support and scaffolds
discussions How does active listening and questioning contribute to literature to allow students to
discussions? (Q3f) accurately share what
they understand about
their texts.
U3. In literature discussions, active listening and questioning
lead readers to deep text analysis.
Assessment: Review
student
generalizations. (U3)
DISCUSSION: Direct students back to their Spectrum Statements which
was explored in an earlier learning experience. Students decided how
strongly they agreed with the statement: “I learn more about a book
when working in book clubs than when reading alone.” Invite students
to revisit the statement based upon their recent experiences in their
book clubs and debate the following question in book clubs or as a class
in a Morning Meeting.
Is it possible to gain as much from a book by reading it alone as
opposed to in a book club? (Q3g)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
INQUIRY 4: An inquiry into fantasy settings (3-4 Sessions)
Activate background
To begin activating students’ prior knowledge of different knowledge about setting
settings, invite students to respond to the following question in a through video clips from
Morning Meeting or to write a journal in a Reader's Notebook: If familiar fantasy stories.
you could join a magical setting from a fantasy story, which would Students will explore
you join and why? setting as viewer before
they interact with
K2: Typical Settings GROUP SORT NAME: (CBIA pg. 122) Provide students with a setting as readers.
in Fantasy Book series of picture cards made up of different settings from familiar
fantasy stories/films. Model the Cross
Comparison Chart using
S7: Analyze how CROSS COMPARISON CHART (CBIA pg. 174): Model how to a mentor text to help all
visual and respond to the questions in the Cross Comparison Chart using the students comprehend
multimedia elements class mentor texts. Students will then watch video clips of popular the questions in
contribute to fantasy films and complete the Cross Comparison Chart in pairs. response to a common
meaning, tone or How did the character(s) enter the magical world? (Q4a) text.
beauty of a text. What is the primary setting? (Q4b)
What details show that the setting is unrealistic? (Q4c) Ensure access to
grade-level texts though
Invite students to add to the Cross Comparison Chart by looking shared reading.
at additional case studies, such as passages from the class read
S4: Summarize a aloud and short stories. Provide additional
written text read examples to emphasize
aloud . Invite Students to Generalize critical features.
S2: Compare and Students respond to a conceptual guiding question to write a Assessment: : Review
contrast stories in generalization. How do authors reveal magical worlds to student generalizations.
the same genre. readers? (Q4d) (U4)
U4: Authors reveal
magical worlds U4: Authors reveal magical worlds through
through characters, characters, settings and unrealistic details.
settings and Revisit and STRESS TEST this generalization during Fantasy Book Provide voice and choice
unrealistic details. Clubs. by allowing students to
select from a wide range
FINAL ASSESSMENT: At the end of the unit, students will transfer of fantasy books.
their understanding in the final assessment. Students will sketch-
note their settings in the planning of their own fantasy worlds.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
INQUIRY 5: An inquiry into signposts of learning (3-4 Sessions) Visual Case Studies:
Invite students to view a series of road signs and discuss the purpose of a Provide access to the
sign. Then direct students to write an analogy using the sentence frame: “A discovery of
signpost is like…” signposts for all
readers with video
S2: Compare CROSS COMPARISON CHART: Invite students to complete a Cross clips. Use shorter
and contrast Comparison Chart to explore how authors show readers that the texts to scaffold the
stories in the protagonist is learning a lesson. Model the chart and work as a class by amount of text that
same genre showing students video clips from well-known fantasy stories as initial case students must sift
studies. Then invite students to investigate previous case studies. through to find
What lesson is the protagonist learning? (Q5b) examples of learning.
How did the author signal to readers that the protagonist is learning a When students begin
lesson? (Q5c) to transfer their
understanding to
CONCEPT QUADRANTS (CBIA pg. 116): Prepare placemats organized into book clubs, they will
K3: Signposts four quadrants for each signpost using examples that the students sift through a chapter
of learning for discovered in the previous fantasy stories. Three quadrants contain book to find
the examples and one contains a non example. At first invite students to notice examples.
protagonist similarities and differences across the four examples and share wonderings.
and reader Then present the guiding question: How did the author signal to readers Clarify vocabulary
that the protagonist is learning a lesson? (Q5c) Invite students to notice and provide sentence
U5. Authors
similarities across three examples on each placemat (eg. Words of the frames to support
show readers
Wiser or Tough Questions). Each group will share a signpost placemat and and promote oral
when a
then discuss the similarities across the placemats. The students will language
protagonist
respond to the concept formation question in their Reader's Notebooks: development.
learns a lesson
What are signposts in literature? (Q5a) Reinforce new
through
language through
signposts (eg.
Invite Students to Generalize anchor charts and
Tough
visual references.
Questions,
Invite students to write a generalization by responding to the conceptual
Words of the
question: How do authors typically show readers that a protagonist is Assessment: Review
Wiser, Memory
learning a lesson? (Q5d) student
Moments).
generalizations. (U5)
U5. Authors show readers when a protagonist learns a lesson through
S11: Write
signposts (eg. Tough Questions, Words of the Wiser, Memory Moments). Provide individual
routinely over
check-ins and
extended time
5.) Students STRESS TEST their generalization in Book Clubs. Using support during
frames
student generalizations, design a list of signposts in which students can conferences.
track how the protagonist learns lessons throughout the book. Invite
students to look out for new signposts of learning.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Learner Variability/
Phase
Assessments
INQUIRY 6: An inquiry into how readers evaluate characters
(4-5 Sessions)
Discussion: Direct students back to their Spectrum Statements Ensure accessibility
which was explored in an earlier learning experience. Students through vocabulary
decided how strongly they agreed with the statement: “I judge support and scaffolds to
people based on a first impression.” Now pose the debatable allow students to
question: Is it better to judge someone based upon a first accurately share what
impression or suspend judgment?(Q6a) You may share a they understand about
personal story and invite students to pair-share a personal story their texts.
about meeting a friend. Afterward students will debate the
guiding question. Provide sentence frames
to promote academic
Students will examine a thought-provoking image and answer conversations.
questions on a chart:
-What do you think is happening in the photograph?
-What do you see that makes you say that?
-What background knowledge do you have to make you say
that?
The class will discuss each image. Students will begin to see how
a lack of knowledge might lead them to inaccurate
interpretations. Then invite students to revisit the guiding
question: Is it better to judge someone based upon a first
impression or suspend judgment?(Q6a)
K4: Examples of Is/Is Not (CBIA pg. 113): Student receive character traits cards Provide students with an
Character Traits and arrange them into groups under the headers Is and Is Not. early concept formation
Examples should include positive and negative character traits. learning engagement to
Non examples should include emotions as sometimes students help build vocabulary
confuse emotions with character traits. Present students with around character traits.
the concept formation question: What are positive and This will allow students to
negative character traits? (Q6b) Then invite students to form do the heavy lifting of
a definition of character traits. On the class concept wall, the examining the text
invite students to add examples of positive and negative evidence and considering
character traits. NOTE: The term character traits is not a part of how authors slowly reveal
the teacher generalization, but it is a part of the students’ the characters’
investigation as they discover that the protagonist has positive personalities across the
and negative character traits (i.e. the hero is flawed). text.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
K11: Examples of TRADING CARDS (CBIA pg. 176): Invite students to examine Preselect or chunk the
text evidence that characters from the read aloud and complete a TRADING CARD for mentor text so that
readers use to each character that they examine. Model the first template, and then students are drawing
determine invite student pairs to investigate a new character. conclusions from
character traits What positive or negative character trait does the character first isolated pieces of text
(e.g. character demonstrate? (Q6c) evidence before sifting
action, speech and What text evidence supports the character trait? (Q6d) through text evidence
thoughts) What is your first impression of the character? (Q6e) in their own chapter
How has your opinion of the character changed over the course of books.
the book? (Q6f)
S3: Engage Book clubs will work in teams to create TRADING CARDS for 1-2 Formative
effectively in a characters in their book. Assessment: Monitor
range of student progress
collaborative The students will share TRADING CARDS across book clubs using through observation of
discussions. sentence starters: book club discussions
-My book is about… and a review of
S2: Compare and -One of the characters is… Reader’s Notebook
contrast stories in -My first impression of the character was…, but I’m beginning to entries. Provide
the same genre think…, because… individual check-ins
(e.g., mysteries and support during
and adventure Invite Students to Generalize conferences.
stories) on their
approaches to Invite students to write a generalization in response to the conceptual
similar themes question: How do readers draw conclusions about characters in a Assessment: Review
and topics. book? (Q6g) student
generalizations. (U5)
U6: Readers
U6: Readers suspend judgment and evaluate text evidence
suspend Promote
from across a book to draw conclusions about characters.
judgment and understanding across
evaluate text languages by allowing
evidence from Invite students to share initial generalizations and respond to one of students to
across a book to the following reflection questions:
translanguage.
draw conclusions -Is the generalization true for all characters in a fantasy book?
about characters. -Why is it important for the protagonist to be somewhat flawed? (This
reflection question might lead students to revisit the first
generalization.)
-What flaws might your protagonist have in your fantasy story?
(Students will have the opportunity to transfer this understanding
when creating their own protagonist in the summative assessment.)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
INQUIRY 7: An inquiry into external and internal quests Pre-assessment: Review
(5 Sessions) students’ individual
analogies to provide
ANALOGY (CBIA pg. 136): Invite students to complete and information about the
share their response to this sentence frame: A quest is like…, student’s prior knowledge
because… of quests.
MODEL: Show a model of a timeline of the main character’s Model the timeline with a
external quest in a mentor text. mentor text to help all
students see the
TIMELINE: In pairs, students will create and present the expectations of creating a
quest of a fantasy story in the format of a timeline and present quest timeline.
S6: Explain how a it to the class. Students are encouraged to select a story that
series of chapters, they know well. While listening each presentation, the class Promote voice and choice
scenes, or stanzas fits will record the title and goal of each quest in a table. by inviting students to
together to provide What is the external quest in _____? (Q7a) select any fantasy story that
the overall structure What is the goal of the quest in ____? (Q7b) they are familiar with. This
of a particular story, also creates space for each
drama, or poem GROUP SORT NAME: Create cards with quest goals from the student to work with other
students’ timelines. Invite students to sort cards into groups students outside of their
K5: Typical Goals of based upon the similarity of the goals. Students will discover book clubs.
an External Quest in that there are typical quest goals across most fantasy stories.
Fantasy Books Invite students to add typical quest goals to the concept wall
as part of a class definition of the concept, ‘external quest’.
Students will use this discovery in the summative assessment
when they determine a quest for their own fantasy stories.
What are typical goals of a quest in a fantasy book? (Q7c)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Learner Variability/
Phase
Assessments
K6: The Difference Compare examples of external and internal events in a
between an External well-known fantasy story. [NOTE: These terms (external and
and Internal Quest internal) have been discussed in other contexts earlier in the
year. This activity serves as a review of these concepts.] In their
Reader’s Notebook, invite students to write a journal in Formative Assessment:
response to the guiding question: Review Reader’s
What is the difference between an internal and external Notebook entries.
quest? (Q7d)
S1: Determine a MODEL: Model an internal quest timeline using the same
theme of a story from mentor text. In the same pairs, students will create an internal
details in the text, quest of the same fantasy story that they created an external
including how quest for in the previous session.
characters in a story
respond to GALLERY WALK: Invite students to examine the external and Foster community and
challenges; internal quest timelines. As students visit other students’ collaboration by allowing
summarize the text. internal quest timelines, they will consider the following students to work with a
guiding questions: partner to explore this
S2: Compare and What is the internal quest in ___? (Q7e) conceptual understanding.
contrast stories in What does the internal quest show about the author’s Students’ background
the same genre on message? (Q7f) knowledge with stories
their approaches to vary and by working in
similar themes and Invite Students to Generalize pairs students will likely
topics. have a broader range of
PARTNER DISCUSSION: Why do readers examine external background knowledge of
U7: Readers examine and internal quests? (Q7g) Then invite students to write a more stories to better
external and internal generalization supported by evidence in their Readers examine what they can
quests to help Notebook. learn from each quest.
determine themes in
fantasy books. Assessment:: Review
U7: Readers examine external and internal quests to
student generalizations.
help determine themes in fantasy books.
(U7)
Present students with the opportunity to transfer their
understanding and create an external and internal quest in their
book clubs to determine the goal of the quest and work toward
discovering a theme in their book. The students will also
transfer this understanding in the summative assessment when
they create an external and internal timeline to plan their own
fantasy story.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
INQUIRY 8: An inquiry into symbols in fantasy literature
(4-5 Sessions)
SESSION I:
S7: Analyze how Invite students to view a series of symbols and discuss what Pre-assessment: Review
visual and they notice. Then they will write their own definition for the students’ individual
multimedia elements concept of symbol. Students will repeat the exercise by definitions to determine
contribute to the examining two paintings and picking out possible symbols. In a students’ prior
meaning, tone, or class discussion, explore typical symbols in art, and invite knowledge of symbols.
beauty of a text students to write a second definition for the concept, symbol.
K7: Typical Symbols MINI-LESSON: Engage students in a brainstorm of common
and their Meanings symbols that appear in fantasy books. Provide students with
in Fantasy Books matching cards and invite students to pair images of symbols
with the idea that they represent. The class will share their
matches and thinking, and then create a list of common symbols
in fantasy stories and their meanings. [Note: Students should be
encouraged to think flexibly around symbolism and also pay
attention to text evidence to determine meaning.]
SESSION II:
CROSS COMPARISON CHART: Students will examine two Scaffold from visual to
paintings and a short story and record their observations in a print case studies to help
Cross Comparison Chart. (Model with the first painting and students grapple with the
allow students to try the second in pairs.) skill of interpreting
What symbols do you see? symbolism in literature.
What does the symbol represent? (Q8c) Students will transition
How do the symbols connect to one another? (Q8d) from examining symbols
What theme do the symbols suggest? (Q8e) in paintings to a short
picture book to a class
read aloud and finally to
their book club book.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for
Inquiry Learner
UKS Focus Learning Experiences
Phase Variability/
Assessments
Invite Students to Generalize
FINDING PATTERNS: Invite students to complete the following Formative
sentence frame for each case study: Assessment: Review
By interpreting symbols in … we found … students’ first thinking
generalizations.
Invite students to write a first thinking generalization. Students will
have the opportunity to rewrite the generalization over the next two
sessions as they examine new case studies.
Why is drawing connections between symbols important? (Q8f)
S6: Explain how a SESSION III:
series of chapters, Invite students to read PASSAGE CARDS from the class read aloud in Scaffold the skill of
scenes, or stanzas pairs. They will discuss symbolism within each passage and complete drawing connections
fits together to a table identifying the symbol and a rationale for why it is a symbol. between symbols by
provide the overall Why do you think ____ is a symbol? (Q8a) using passage cards
structure of a from the class read
particular story, CROSS COMPARISON CHART: Invite students to complete the same aloud to break down
drama, or poem. chart as in the previous session using the text on the PASSAGE CARDS the density of a
from the class read aloud. chapter book in the
S1: Determine a What does the symbol represent? (Q8c) beginning of the
theme of a story, How do the symbols connect to one another? (Q8d) inquiry.
drama, or poem What theme do the symbols suggest? (Q8e)
from details in the
text, including how Encourage students to share and engage in dialogue about the
characters in a symbols that they find.
story or drama
respond to Invite Students to Generalize Formative
challenges or how Assessment: Review
the speaker in a FINDING PATTERNS: In small groups, invite students to respond to students’ first thinking
poem reflects upon the same sentence frame: “By interpreting the symbols in (class read generalizations.
a topic; summarize aloud), we found…”
the text. The students will revise their initial generalization as needed: Provide sentence
Why is drawing connections between symbols important? (Q8f) frames to help
U8: Readers draw students recognize
connections between U8: Readers draw connections between symbols to help patterns across case
symbols to help determine a theme. studies and articulate
determine a theme. a relationship between
concepts.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S3: Engage effectively SESSION IV:
in a range of BOOK CLUBS: Invite students to work in book clubs to identify Provide voice and choice by
collaborative important symbols and complete a Cross Comparison Chart for enabling students to select
discussions the symbols. The class will discuss how symbols are found in a from a wide range of fantasy
(one-on-one, in book using the class read aloud and all book club books. books.
groups, and Why do you think ____ is a symbol? (Q8a)
teacherled) with How do readers find symbols in a book? (Q8b)
diverse partners on Formative Assessment:
grade 5 topics and CROSS COMPARISON CHART: Invite students to complete Observe student
texts, building on the same chart as in the previous session in order to find participation in book clubs
others’ ideas and connections between the symbols. and review completed cross
expressing their own What does the symbol represent? (Q8c) comparison charts.
clearly. How do the symbols connect to one another? (Q8d)
What theme do the symbols suggest? (Q8e)
S5: Compare and
contrast two or more SESSION V:
characters, settings, or Invite Students to Generalize Assessment: Review
events in a story or student generalizations.
drama, drawing on FINDING PATTERNS: Invite students to respond to the same (U8)
specific details in the sentence frame: “By interpreting the symbols in (book club book),
text (e.g., how we found…”
characters interact). The students will revise their generalization as needed using the
conceptual question and support the statement with text evidence.
U8: Readers draw Why is drawing connections between symbols important?
connections between (Q8f)
symbols to help
determine a theme. FINAL ASSESSMENT: Provide students with the opportunity to
apply their understanding of symbolism by determining symbols
that they will include in their own fantasy stories.
REFLECTION: Invite students to read over their generalizations
from the past three sessions and respond to the reflection
question:
-How has your thinking about drawing connections between
symbols evolved?
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International
Resources
● Fantasy novels and films
○ Potential Fantasy Novels for Book Clubs and/or Read Alouds:
■ Harry Potter series by J.K. Rowling
■ The Chronicles of Narnia series by C.S. Lewis
■ The Lord of the Ring series by J.R.R. Tolkien
■ The Land of Stories series by Chris Colfer
■ The Cat Warriors series by Erin Hunter
■ Percy Jackson series by Rick Riordan
■ The Phantom Tollbooth by Norton Juster
○ Potential Fantasy Films to use for video clips
■ Harry Potter series by J.K. Rowling
■ The Chronicles of Narnia series by C.S. Lewis
■ Raya and the Last Dragon by Disney
● Teacher Resources: Reading Comprehension and Inquiry Strategies
■ Notice and Note by Kylene Beers and Bob Probst
■ Concept-Based Inquiry in Action by Carla Marschall and Rachel French
Teacher Reflection:
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Evita Flock © 2022 Professional Learning International