Concept-Based Curriculum Unit
Me and My Family: Stories to Learn About
Unit Title: Subject: Literacy
Each Other
Conceptual
Storytelling/ Reader Engagement Teacher(s): Ashley Hill
Lens:
Grade Level: 1 Duration: 5-6 Weeks
Unit overview:
Families are special. Each of our families is different. We do different activities with our families, engage in special
traditions, celebrate holidays, and have memorable experiences together. We love to tell others about our families
and what makes them so special. How can we do this as writers? How do authors share stories that make their
readers feel like they were there and experienced what happened? In this unit, we are going to explore how to write
personal stories that your readers connect to. Each week you will be writing a story to add to your writing collection.
We are going to share stories that make us laugh, cry, scare us but in the end bring us closer together by learning
about each other and our beautiful families.
Notes for teachers:
This unit does not address foundational reading skills specific to phonics and phonemic awareness. A systematic
analytic phonics program will run parallel to this unit. Phonemic awareness will be addressed daily through activities
such as listening games, chants, morning messages, to name a few ideas. Each child should engage in daily
independent reading and receive personalized coaching through a reading conference at a minimum of once every
two weeks to address their individual needs. Students working below grade level should be conferenced with more
frequently to accelerate growth.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Unit Web
Understanding Text Responding to Text
● Story Elements ● Point of View
● Author’s Purpose ● Connections
● Word choice ● Reflection
● Narrative elements ● Reader response
● Visualization ● Reader engagement
● Event ● Appropriate feedback
● Organization ● Active listening
● Chronological Sequence ● Emotional response
Unit Title:
Me and My Family: Stories to Learn About Each Other
Conceptual Lens:
Storytelling/Reader Engagement
Producing Text
Critiquing Text
● Word choice
● Effectiveness of word choice
● Details/Elaboration
● Clarity
● Sentence structure
● Reader enjoyment
● Transitional words and phrases
● Description
● Writing conventions
● Style
● Storyteller
● Author’s craft
● Grammar
● Interpretation
● Writing process
● Publication
● Organization
● Personal Narrative
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Generalizations and Guiding Questions
Guiding Questions
Generalizations
Z=Concept Formation, F=Factual, C=Conceptual, D=Debatable
U1. Sharing personal stories with 1a. What is a personal story? What is a family story? (Z)
detailed descriptions helps the 1b. Why do people share personal stories? (C)
audience feel the emotions of the 1c. Do you feel interested in this story and what does the author do to help you stay
story teller. interested? (F)
1d. What parts of the story made you feel happy or sad (or other emotions)? Why? (F)
1e. What words does the author use to help you feel what is happening in the story? (F)
1f. How do storytellers help their audience feel emotions? (C)
U2. Readers identify the point of view 2a. What is ‘point of view’? (Z)
in stories to better understand events 2b. What are the different points of view a story can be written through? (F)
and experiences. 2c. Who is telling this story and what is their point of view? (F)
2d. How does identifying their point of view help you understand XXX? (F)
2e. How would the story be different if it was told from another point of view? (F)
2f. Why do authors choose to tell stories from different points of view? (C)
2g. How does identifying a point of view help readers? (C)
2h. Can people experience the same event but have a different interpretation? (D)
U3. Authors properly sequence events 3a. What does sequence of events mean? (Z)
to enable readers to make sense of a 3b. What words or phrases does the author use to sequence the story or event? (F)
story. 3c. Does this story makes sense? Why or why not? If not, what was confusing about it?
(F)
3d. What happens to a story if an author leaves out an event? (C)
3e. Are all details important in the development of the story? (D)
3f. Why do authors carefully sequence stories? (C)
3g. How does an author know which details/events to include and which ones to leave
out? (C)
U4. Following a writing process helps 4a. What are the steps in the writing process? (F)
authors strengthen the quality of 4b. Why are the steps in the writing process used in this order? (F)
their writing. 4c. What did you focus on to improve your writing? (F)
4d. Why is it important to plan out writing? (C)
4e. How does revising and editing a rough draft help strengthen a piece of writing? (C)
4f. Why is it valuable to have peers review writing before publishing? (C)
4g. Why do writers use a formal writing process? (C)
U5. Writers use specific words, 5a. What do you notice about how ___(author) described the people, places, and events
details, and organization to create an in the story? (F)
enjoyable story for their readers. 5b. What made this story enjoyable? What could the author include to make the story
more enjoyable? (F)
5c. How do an author’s word choices and details help readers visualize what is
happening? (C)
5d. How do writers create an enjoyable story for their readers? (C)
5e. Do you feel the author left out details that would have improved the overall story?
(D)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Knowledge and Skills
Knowledge Skills
Students will know… Students will be able to...
Understanding Text Understanding Text
K1: Story Elements (characters, setting, S1: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.1.3: Describe characters, settings, and major events in a
problem, and solution) story, using key details.
K2: Comprehension strategies
S2: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.1.1: Demonstrate understanding of the organization and
K3: Definition of point of view
basic features of print.
K4: Organization and sequence of
S3: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RF.1.4.A: Read grade-level text with purpose and
narrative writing
understanding.
S4: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.1.6: Identify who is telling the story at various points in a
text.
Responding to Text Responding to Text
K5: Retelling strategies and techniques S6: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL.1.7: Use illustrations and details in a story to describe its
K6: Appropriate feedback characters, setting, or events.
K7: Active listening strategies
S7: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.L.1.6: Use words and phrases acquired through conversations,
reading and being read to, and responding to texts, including using frequently
occurring conjunctions to signal simple relationships (e.g., because).
S8: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.SL.1.1: Participate in collaborative conversations with diverse
partners about grade 1 topics and texts with peers and adults in small and larger
groups.
Critiquing Text Critiquing Text
K8: Elements of personal narratives S9: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.1.5: With guidance and support from adults, focus on a
K9: Effectiveness of word choice topic, respond to questions and suggestions from peers, and add details to strengthen
K10: Clarity in personal narratives
writing as needed.
Producing Text Producing Text
K11: Stages of a writing process S10: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.1.3: Write narratives in which they recount two or more
K12: Writing conventions, grammar, appropriately sequenced events, include some details regarding what happened, use
and sentence structure
temporal words to signal event order, and provide some sense of closure.
K13: Examples of details, elaboration,
S11: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.W.1.6: With guidance and support from adults, use a variety
and word choice in narrative writing
of digital tools to produce and publish writing, including in collaboration with peers.
K14: Elements of narrative writing
S12: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.SL.1.4: Describe people, places, things, and events with
relevant details, expressing ideas and feelings clearly.
S13: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.SL.1.5: Add drawings or other visual displays to descriptions
when appropriate to clarify ideas, thoughts, and feelings.
S14: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.L.1.1: Demonstrate command of the conventions of standard
English grammar and usage when writing or speaking.
S15: CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.L.1.2: Demonstrate command of the conventions of standard
English capitalization, punctuation, and spelling when writing.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Assessment
How will we know students have achieved the learning goals?
Summative Assessment Task(s) UKS Assessed
What: Students will investigate the art of crafting a collection of narrative pieces.
Why: In order to understand that…
Writers use specific words, details, and organization to create an enjoyable story
for their readers.
Following a formal writing process can help authors strengthen the quality of
their writing.
How: Throughout the unit, we explored many different narrative writings and
how authors use them to share stories, connect with their readers, and teach us
about who they are. You have written lots of personal stories about yourself and
your family. Your assignment is to take all that you have learned about narrative
writing and create a collection of your own personal stories to share with your
classmates and family at our learning celebration. At the learning celebration,
you will have the opportunity to read your collection aloud.
Step 1: Think about who your audience is, what stories would be most engaging
and interesting for them to read?
Step 2: Think about who you are and what makes your family special. Which
writing pieces will help your audience connect with you and learn more about
who you are?
Assessment Type Step 3: Choose 4 pieces that you want to showcase in your collection.
and Task:
Step 4: Review these pieces of writing. Revise and edit your writing by adding
more detail, correcting spelling, punctuation, or grammar mistakes. Use the
rubric to ensure you have everything you need in your writing.
Step 5: Publish these pieces in your book template. Use your best handwriting.
Bring in a picture from home or create an image that enhances your story.
Step 6: Create a cover that goes with your collection that includes a title,
illustration, and the author.
Step 7: In your online portfolio, create a video of you reading your collection.
This will help prepare you for our learning celebration.
Step 8: Meet with your teacher to turn in your graphic organizers used in the
planning stage, all your rough drafts, and your final book.
Be prepared to answer the questions:
● Why did you choose the 4-5 pieces of writings for your collection?
● Why do you think your audience will be interested and enjoy these
pieces? You will share some of the techniques you used as a writer and
explain why you think those choices will help create an enjoyable
experience for your readers. How do writers create an enjoyable
experience for their readers?
● How did the writing process (peer review, revising, and editing) help
improve your stories? Why do writers follow a formal writing process?
Assessment Tool 4-point scoring guide
(rubric,
checklist, etc.)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit authorAshley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Scoring Guide: Scored for Each Writing Piece #1 #2 #3 #4
4
Meets and exceeds standard criteria plus…
Examples: Recounts more than two events, writes from a different point of view
3
Understanding: Able to accurately articulate why they selected the writing pieces included in their collection and
how the writing process helped increase the quality of their writing and how writers publish interesting and enjoyable
pieces for their readers.
Content: Writing communicates a personal story about the writer and their family
Process:
All steps of the writing process were followed/used
Provides details and elaboration
Recounts two events
Events are correctly sequenced
Closure is provided at the end of each writing
Demonstrates command of grade-level grammar and conventions
Illustration or images enhance the writing
2
Meets 4/8 of the criteria in the standard for each writing piece.
1
Non-scorable or does not yet approach standard
Assessment
How will we know students have achieved the learning goals?
Pre-Assessment Task(s) UKS Assessed
What do students already know about personal/family stories? U1. Sharing personal
stories with detailed
Use personal stories to optimize relevance, value, and authenticity, Ask descriptions helps the
students to share a personal/family story with another student. audience feel the emotions
of the story teller.
Assessment Type
Support comprehension by activating background knowledge about
and Task: U3. Authors properly
personal/family stories
sequence events to enable
readers to make sense of a
Prior to reading A Chair for My Mother, have students draw a picture of a
story.
time they gave someone they cared about a special gift.
S6:CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RL
Use a checklist and anecdotal notes to note students background
.1.7: Use illustrations and
knowledge and what they share, their ability to sequence personal details in a story to
Assessment Tool stories and their ability to use illustrations and details in a story to describe its characters,
setting, or events.
(rubric, describe its characters, setting, or events.
checklist, etc.)
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
U1: Sharing personal Exploring Detailed Descriptions Pre-assessment: What do
stories with detailed students already know
descriptions helps Interactive read-aloud: about personal/family
the audience feel the Display books sharing family stories around the room. During stories?
emotions of the story an interactive read-aloud, use the book, A Chair for My Mother
Use personal stories to
teller. by Vera B. Williams, pose the questions:
optimize relevance, value,
1a. What is a personal/family story?
and authenticity, Ask
K1: Story Elements 1b. Why do we share personal stories?
students to share a
(characters, setting, Students can explore the other stories around the room, if
personal/family story with
problem, and needed. Capture students' responses on a class anchor chart
another student. Use a
solution) and update the anchor charts throughout the unit.
checklist to note students
K2: Comprehension
background knowledge and
strategies Sharing Personal/Family Stories
what they share.
Students will work with their families or at school with a
teacher to write a personal/family story by dictating the story
Support comprehension by
to the adult. The teacher will then read these at the class
activating background
morning meetings throughout the unit to engage students and
knowledge about
create connections between the students.
personal/family stories
S3:Read grade-level
text with purpose Daily Interactive Read Alouds, Independent Reading, and Prior to reading A Chair for
and understanding. Reading Conferences My Mother, have students
Use guiding questions to structure and guide the read-alouds draw a picture of a time
and create goals for students during their silent reading time. they gave someone they
Record responses on a Cross-Comparison Chart p.174. cared about a special gift.
Vary methods of response
S6:Use illustrations 1c. Do you feel interested in the story and what does the
and use multiple tools for
and details in a story author do to help you stay interested?
composition. Students may
to describe its 1d. What parts of the story made you feel happy or sad (or
draw story prior to dictating
characters, setting, or other emotions)? Why?, and
to support language needs
events. 1e. What words does the author use to help you feel what
is happening in the story?
Provide auditory and visual
support through read aloud
and displaying text
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S8: Participate in As students investigate other mentor texts, encourage them to Formative Assessment:
collaborative pay attention to : Monitor student progress
conversations with ● What the character is feeling (record in blue), through student responses
diverse partners ● How the story made them feel when they were during whole class
about grade 1 topics reading (record in red) instruction, and provide
and texts with peers ● What words helped to create those emotions (record individual check-ins during
and adults in small in Green) reading conferences.
and larger groups. ● Organize responses using a wall display with book
covers and photos of the students and colour coded
responses.
Revisit the ideas revealed through the daily Interactive Read Promote understanding
Alouds. Pose guiding question: 1f. How do storytellers help across languages by
their audience feel emotions? and allow students to discuss allowing students to
through a Turn and Talk. This question will be revisited again translanguage as needed
prior to students generalizing.
Formative Assessment:
During daily morning meetings, encourage students to share Observe student
stories with detailed descriptions so their classmates can feel conversations
what they are sharing and reflect on the experience together.
Select read aloud texts
Potential Read Aloud Texts: based on relevance to
Applesauce Day by Lisa J. Amstutz students and representation
The Relatives Came by Cynthia Rylant of students.
New Shoes by Chris Raschka
Summer Supper by Ruben Pfeffer Foster collaboration and
Enemy Pie by Derek Munson community through
Mango, Abuela, and Me by Meg Medina and Angela Dominguez challenging cognitive tasks
My Dog Mouse by Eva Lindstrom that require collaboration
Evelyn Del Rey Is Moving Away by Meg Medina
Formative Assessment:
Spectrum Sort Review student sorts and
Using the read-aloud texts students will rank the books by listen to student
which ones used the most details to help them feel the explanations. Students can
emotions of the storyteller. The teacher will provide students present final sort to the
with pictures of the book covers to glue along the spectrum. class or to the teacher while
They will use the scale “least detail to most detail” After sharing their thinking.
students have finished their sort, they will discuss the
differences between the most/least detailed descriptions in
the books and why they sorted the texts the way they did.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S1: Describe Review: Comprehending Stories Through Story Elements Facilitate managing new
characters, settings, Invite students to share the elements of stories. This is not information and prior
and major events in a students’ first exposure to story elements. During interactive knowledge through the use
story, using key read alouds, using questioning strategies and mentor texts to of a Cross-Comparison
details. revisit characters, setting and problem/solution. Ask students Chart.
to try to access prior knowledge and define each element, but
Formative Assessment:
provide scaffolding so that the co-created definition is
Observe students during
accurate.
Interactive Read Aloud,
Focus on understanding of
Add the story element, definition, examples and pictures on a
story elements, Address
class anchor chart. Use Cross-Comparison Chart (p.174.)
individual needs during
to capture details/story elements from read-aloud texts.
reading conferences.
Students can use the same Cross-Comparison Chart
to reflect on during their independent reading time and
reading conferences. This can be a quick revisit of story
elements if students are demonstrating a strong
understanding. Potential Mentor Text: Jabari Jumps by Gaia
Cornwall.
U1: Sharing personal
Maximize generalization
stories with detailed Connect 4 Placemat -(p. 218)
and transfer by scaffolding
descriptions helps Revisit guiding question:
the process of
the audience feel the 1f. How do storytellers help their audience feel emotions?
generalization with a
emotions of the story Choose four read-aloud texts the class has engaged in as case
graphic organizer.
teller. studies that can serve as strong examples. Create a Connect 4
(p.218) placemat with each text and students will circle if the Promote understanding
text helped them feel emotions or not and how the author’s across languages through
descriptions encouraged them to feel this way. sentence frames in the
language of instruction and
Invite Students to Generalize (U1): If needed, provide students’ home language.
students with scaffolding through a Sentence Frame (p.222):
Sharing personal stories with…
U1: Sharing personal stories with detailed descriptions helps
the audience feel the emotions of the story teller.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S12: Describe people, Narrative Story Collection Optimize individual choice
places, things, and Students will use their knowledge of personal stories, details, and autonomy by inviting
events with relevant and story elements to begin creating a collection of narrative students to self-select
details, expressing writing pieces about their life and family. Focus on what stories.
ideas and feelings stories they want to tell and why those stories are important
Summative Assessment:
clearly. for them to tell. Encourage students to identify stories in
Review student
which they experienced a strong emotion such as being happy
generalizations (U1) and
or sad. This will support students as they use detailed
their ability to transfer the
descriptions in their own writing to help the audience feel the
idea to their own writing
emotions of their story. Record student ideas on an anchor
process. Be looking for their
chart. Students will brainstorm on their own some potential
use of detailed descriptions
stories to share in their writing collection. Students will
to help the audience feel
choose one story idea and create a first draft.
emotions.
During a writing
conference, offer mastery
oriented feedback targeted
to students’ individual
strengths and areas for
growth. Invite students to
reflect on their writing
process and use of detailed
descriptions.
U2: Readers identify Exploring Point of View Activate or supply
the point of view in background knowledge
stories to better Read aloud a story that visually highlights different points of about point of view.
understand events view. Potential Mentor Text: They All Saw a Cat by Brendan
and experiences. Wenzel. Engage student thinking about how the different Formative Assessment:
characters see the cat as a way to prepare them to further What do students already
K3: Definition of investigate the concept of point of view. know about point of view?
point of view
Clarify vocabulary and
Pose guiding question 2a. What is ‘point of view’?
provide sentence frames to
S3: Read grade-level
support and promote oral
text with purpose Students will listen to the book Snow Sister! By Teagan White.
language development,
and understanding.
Reinforce new language
Students will then use Think Square- Discussion Protocol
through anchor charts and
(p.92) to share their thinking about the two different points
visual references.
of view shown in the story. They will examine and explain the
differences, similarities, and wonderings.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S4: Identity who is The teacher will then introduce point of view by creating an Formative Assessment:
telling the story at anchor chart about point of view, who is telling the story with Obserserve student
various points in a keywords that help determine the point of view, and a participation during
text. read-aloud book for each type as they read them throughout Interactive Read Alouds, Pay
the unit. attention to understanding
of point of view, Address
During read-alouds, pose guiding questions 2b. What are the individual needs during
different points of view a story can be written through? 2c. reading conferences.
Who is telling this story and what do you understand from
their point of view? Organize ideas using a Cross Comparison
Chart during read-alouds, invite students to reflect on the
S4: Identity who is importance of identifying the point of view for readers.
telling the story at Provide additional examples
various points in a Potential Read Aloud Mentor Texts for Points of View: to emphasize critical
text. First Person features
Key Words: I, me, my, us, ours, we
Clarify vocabulary and offer
Read Aloud: The Camping Trip by Jennifer K. Mann
visual representations
Second Person
Key Words: You, your, yours
Read Aloud: Bubbles...Up by Jacqueline Davies
S8:Participate in Third Person:
collaborative Key Words: He, she, they, them, him, her, their
conversations with Read Aloud: Milo Imagines the World by Matt de la Pena
diverse partners Support students in goal
about grade 1 topics Point of View Scavenger Hunt Using Case Study Texts setting and management of
and texts with peers Students will work in small groups or independently with a resources throughout task,
and adults in small collection of books told from various points of view. model behavior or provide a
and larger groups. Students will investigate guiding questions: simple personal checklist
2c. Who is telling this story and what is their point of view?
2d. How does identifying their point of view help you
understand XXX? Illustrate through multiple
medias by including QR
They will have access to QR codes and audiobooks to help codes to stories being read
with their investigation. They will complete a chart that lists aloud and audio books.
the three types of points of view and will find one book that
fits under each type and record their responses.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
Potential Read Aloud Mentor Texts: Vary demands and
The Teddy Bear by David McPhail resources to optimize
How to Babysit a Grandpa by Jean Reagan challenge by differentiating
Speak Up Molly Lou Melon by Patty Lovell text complexity and reading
levels as needed
Investigate a New Case Study Formative Assessment:
Using the book Voices in the Park by Anthony Brown the class Invite students to self reflect
will create a cross-comparison chart to show how each of the on their contribution to the
voices in the story had a different point of view of the same group scavenger hunt,
event and how the different points of view changed the Review completed charts
outcome of the story. for accuracy of ideas
Students will reflect on a time that they had a different point Optimize relevance and
of view than someone else. Throughout the lesson, students authenticity by connecting
will discuss guiding questions: the concept of point of view
2e. How would the story be different if it was told from to students own lives
another point of view?
2f. Why do authors choose to tell stories from different
points of view?
2h. Can people experience the same event but have a
different interpretation?
U2: Readers identify Socio-dramatic Play Vary methods for response
the point of view in With the use of puppets, hats, dress-up clothes, and/or props and expression through
stories to better the students will act out one of the texts read throughout the kinesthetic play based
understand events unit. opportunities
and experiences.
When they are finished with their dramatic play they will Allow students to take on
work in a group to decide why the author chose to write the different roles and
story they acted out from the point of view it was told in. The responsibilities during
puppet theater will remain a learning station for the duration dramatic play to increase
of the unit. The impact of different points of view will not be on-task oriented behaviors,
mastered in one play session. This idea will spiral throughout Invite students to pause and
the unit. reflect on personal
behaviors, if needed
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
Invite Students to Generalize (U2): Provide alternative ways for
Record Ideas students to communicate
Strategy to Generalize: Conceptual Question (p.214) generalizations, including
Exit ticket- 2g. How does identifying a point of view help verbal responses or
readers? one-on-one conversation
Example of Exit Ticket: Students will circle their during a reading
understandings Identifying point of view helps me as a reader conference, Allow students
understand… to translanguage as needed
The Setting The Characters The Problem The solution
To support students’ generalizations, revisit their responses
to questions 2a-2e revisiting the organizers use to record Summative Assessment:
thinking. Review student
generalizations (U2)and
Writing from Different Points of View their ability to transfer the
Explore guiding question: idea to their own writing
2h. Can people experience the same event but have a process. Look for their use
different interpretation? of point of view to tell the
Students will select one of the narrative pieces they have story from a different
written and write the same story but from someone else's perspective.
point of view in the story.
Use multiple tools for
communication by allowing
Students will share stories and reflect on question 2g. Revisit
students to record a video
student generalizations and invite students to consider how
of themselves telling the
identifying different points of views can help readers.
story from another point of
view.
During a writing
conference, offer mastery
oriented feedback targeted
to students’ individual
strengths and areas for
growth, Invite students to
reflect on their writing
process and application of
point of view
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
U3: Authors properly Exploring Sequence of Events Activate background
sequence events to Activate Prior Knowledge: Jumbled Routines knowledge about sequence
enable readers to Provide a small collection of daily routines cut into individual of events
make sense of a steps or events. Invite students to notice and wonder about
Pre-assessment: What do
story. the individual events. What do the steps represent? Do the
students already know
steps need to go in order? Why or why not? Examples:
about sequence of events?
K7: Active listening Brushing teeth, tying shoes, making the bed The goal is help
strategies students revisit what they understand about the importance
Optimize relevance and
of a sequence of events.
authenticity by selecting
S2: Demonstrate
routines that are culturally
understanding of the Create Combine
relevant
organization and Pose guiding question:
basic features of 3a. What does sequence of events mean?
Ensure accessibility through
print. Create and Combine (p.126) strategy to build a shared
vocabulary support and
understanding of concept: sequence of events.
scaffolds to allow students
S3: Read grade-level
to accurating share what
text with purpose *Note: Students have a working understanding of the term
they understand about
and understanding. event from a previous social studies unit but they are about to
sequence of events
K5: Retelling transfer their understanding of the concept to this new
strategies and context.
Formative Assessment:
techniques
Review student created
Read Alouds, Shared Reading, Writing
definitions of sequence of
S7:Use words and Invite students to notice the words or phrases the author uses
events.
phrases acquired to sequence a read-aloud story.
through
Use shared reading time to
conversations, Explore guiding question:
foster a sense of community
reading and being 3b. What words or phrases does the author use to
and provide access to expert
read to, and sequence the story or event?
thinking
responding to texts, After a few stories, the class can co-create an anchor chart
including using with transition words and phrases that show sequence. The
Provide visual
frequently occurring teacher models using these words or phrases when modeling
representations of key
conjunctions to writing.
words on the class anchor
signal simple
chart
relationships (e.g., Potential Read Aloud Mentor Texts:
because). Saturdays and Teacakes by Lester Laminack
Optimize relevance and
The Napping House by Audrey Wood
value by selecting read
Pancakes for Breakfast By Tomie dePaola
aloud texts that are
Eat, Leo! Eat! By Caroline Adderson and Josee Bisaillon
meaningful for students
A Thousand White Butterflies by Jessica Betancourt-Perez and
Karen Lynn Williams
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S8:Participate in Exploring Sequence of Events Guide information
collaborative During shared reading the teacher uses the text Spaghetti in a processing and visualization
conversations with Hot Dog Bun by Maria Dismondy to explore a sequence of by strategically selecting
diverse partners events in a story. which students will receive
about grade 1 topics cards and which will
and texts with peers Prior to reading, the teacher has the events of the story observe the process, Use
and adults in small written down on cards accompanied with pictures from the hand signals and verbal
and larger groups. book. cues to allow all students to
be involved in the
The teacher mixes up these cards and hands them out to arrangement of the events
different students. The teacher guides the class in putting the
events in the correct sequence and retells the story using the Formative Assessment:
sequence of events and appropriate transition words. The Observe student responses
teacher then takes out a major event and tries to retell the during whole classroom
story with that event missing. Students discuss what task. Revisit the idea of
happened to the story when that event was left out. sequence of events during
reading conferences or
Use following guiding questions to facilitate the inquiry: small group work. Provide
U5: Writers use 3c. Does this story makes sense? Why or why not? If not, additional practice or
specific words, what was confusing about it? reinforcement, if needed.
details, and 3d. What happens to a story if an author leaves out an
organization to event? 3e. Are all details important in the development of
create an enjoyable the story?
story for their Promote self-regulation by
readers. Students then work in small groups or alone to sequence the allowing students to work
book The Little Red Fort by Brenda Maier. They will sequence in small groups or alone
K8: Elements of the story in the same manner that was used during shared based on their individual
personal narratives reading. Remind students to reference the anchor chart with preference
K9: Effectiveness of transition words and phrases. Students can share their
word choice learning by taking a picture of the finished sequence or gluing Use multiple media for
K10: Clarity in the events down in the correct order. communication through
personal narratives taking a picture or gluing a
Sequencing games will be included as a learning station printed copy
S2:Demonstrate during play to learn time to continue to refine and reinforce
understanding of the Formative Assessment:
the concept.
organization and Review students completed
basic features of sequence of events
Invite Students to Generalize (U3):
print.
Use guiding question 3f. Why do authors carefully sequence
stories? to facilitate the conversation.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
Exploring Sequence of Events in Writing and Compose Summative Assessment:
Narrative Writing Piece Review student
The teacher introduces a simple graphic organizer that helps generalizations (U3)and
organize students' stories, by choosing the major events to their ability to transfer the
include, and sequencing the events for their narrative pieces. idea to their own writing
process. Look for their use
Students use this organizer to plan their next narrative of a clear sequence of
writing piece. Focusing on important events and the sequence events
of the events.
During a writing
conference, offer mastery
During an individual writing conference, pose guiding
oriented feedback targeted
question 3g. How does an author know which
to students’ individual
details/events to include and which ones to leave out?
strengths and areas for
Invite students to reflect on the details/events they will
growth, Invite students to
include and which ones they will leave out. Students will use
reflect on their writing
their graphic organizer to create a new narrative writing
process and use of sequence
piece.
of events
U5: Writers use Exploring Reader Engagement Personalize and
specific words, contextualize learning to
details, and Invite students to think about their favorite stories. What do students’ lives through
organization to they love about their favorite stories? What makes those celebrating students
create an enjoyable stories enjoyable to read? favorite stories
story for their
readers. Concept Cards Formative Assessment: As
The teacher distributes two examples of a first-grade level students engage with the
K8: Elements of narrative writing piece. The teacher reads these aloud with Concept Cards, listen for
personal narratives the class. The teacher then hands out a packet of Concept understanding of each
Cards. individual concept and their
K9: Effectiveness of ability to accurately discuss
word choice The students pull out a concept and examine the examples the concept in the context of
using the question, What do you notice about how each the on grade-level writing
K10: Clarity in example uses ______? samples
personal narratives
The concept cards should represent the important concepts
from the unit that we want students to transfer to their own
writing, such as organization, sequence of events, point of
view, details, description. Students discuss in pairs and share
out as a class.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S2: Demonstrate The students complete this process with the rest of the Support students in
understanding of the concepts. The goal is to revisit important concepts in the information processing to
organization and context of student created, on grade level writing. categorize the techniques
basic features of authors uses to create an
print. Think-Alouds and Interactive Read-alouds enjoyable experience for the
The teacher will facilitate interactive read-alouds, and shared reader- Create additional
writing to emphasize different choices author’s make about anchor charts and
S7: Use words and their writing to create an enjoyable writing piece. Emphasize annotated models, as
phrases acquired the reciprocal nature of being a reader and being a writer. needed
through
conversations, The following questions will guide the think-alouds:
reading and being 5b. What made this story enjoyable? What could the author Formative Assessment:
read to, and include to make the story more enjoyable? Invite students to share out
responding to texts, 5a. What do you notice about how ___(author) described the during think-aloud, Note
including using people, places, and events in the story? students that could use
frequently occurring 5c. How do an author’s word choices and details help additional explicit teaching
readers visualize what is happening? through small group or
5e. Do you feel the author left out details that would have individual conferences
improved the overall story?
Potential Read Aloud Mentor Texts:
Hiking Day by Anne Rockwell
City Moon by Rachael Cole
Not Little by Maya Myers
A Bike Like Sergio’s by Maribeth Boelts
Kitchen Dance by Maurie J. Manning Scaffold self-reflection
When Lola Visits by Michelle Sterling process through additional
Tight Times by Barbara Shook Hazen graphic organizers or 1-1
Watercress by Andrea Wang conversations with teacher
During the interactive read alouds and shared writing, invite Optimize challenge by
students to continually reflect on their experience as a reader, differentiating based on
build connections to the technique the author used and the degree of difficulty or text
students’ enjoyment as a reader. Invite students to consider complexity
the techniques they want to incorporate into their own
writing to make an enjoyable experience for the reader.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
The students will also have the opportunity to browse a Formative Assessment:
collection of mentor texts that were used throughout the unit Methods of assessment can
to examine the same questions the teacher used during the vary, Focus on gathering
modeled think-alouds and interactive read-alouds. The data about students’ ability
students can share their thinking through: to recognize the elements of
● Turn and talks author’s craft taught
● Exit tickets throughout the unit with a
● Writing prompts specific emphasis on how
● Sentence stems those techniques help
● Collaborative discussions create an enjoyable
experience for a reader
S9: With guidance Revision and Editing
and support from Students will use their understanding of the writing process Formative Assessment:
adults, focus on a and the structure of narrative writings to revise their writing As students are revising
topic, respond to pieces and provide feedback to their peers. The focus should their writing pieces and
questions and be on creating an enjoyable experience for the reader. engaging in peer
suggestions from conferences, monitor
peers, and add Students will Generalize (U5) as part of the Culminating student progress, Provide
details to strengthen Assessment and Craft Report additional support and
writing as needed. See cumulative assessment for more details. writing models, Explicitly
reteach key writing skills
After creating their collection of narrative pieces, students will based on student need in
explain the process they engaged in as writers constructing writing conferences.
their narrative writings. Students can choose to write or
record their craft reports. They will articulate the techniques Allow multiple tools for
they used and explain why they were effective. Students will communication and
also cite specific examples from their writing. Discuss composition of narrative
students work as a writer and guiding question 5d. How do writing pieces and the
writers create an enjoyable story for their readers? during reflective craft report
individual writing conferences.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
U4: Following a Exploring the Writing Process - Ongoing Throughout the Guide appropriate goal
writing process can Unit setting and support
help authors planning/strategy
strengthen the Each week students will transfer their understandings by development, Enhance
quality of their producing a new narrative writing piece to add to their capacity for progress
writing. collection. The students will engage in the formal writing monitoring, Eg. provide
process each week in order to generalize at the end of the unit goal setting sheets, frequent
K6: Appropriate through the summative task. The new writing will focus on teacher check-ins, regular
feedback the generalization and learning for that week. reflection, procedural
checklists with visual
K11: Stages of a Throughout the unit, the teacher will model a new step in the support, break longer tasks
writing process writing process each week during shared writing. Students into smaller chunks
will engage in the full writing process around each narrative
K12: Writing piece they want to add to their collection.
conventions, Formative Assessment:
grammar, and Use guiding question: During whole class
sentence structure 4a. What are the steps in the writing process? instruction and individual
4b. Why are the steps in the writing process used in this writing conferences gather
K13: Examples of order? data about students
details, elaboration, to focus the initial conversations. developing understanding
and word choice in of the writing process, Use a
narrative writing The class will engage in creating and referencing anchor Writing Process rubric and
charts that document the steps, and graphic organizers to plan Narrative Writing rubric to
K14: Elements of their writing and support the transfer of understanding. provide mastery oriented
narrative writing Invite students to reflect on question 4d. Why is it important feedback
to plan your writing? during the prewriting phase. Across all
S10: Write narratives phases of the writing process, encourage students to consider
in which they how the writing process is helping to strengthen the quality
recount two or more of their writing. Revisit question 4c. What did you focus on to
appropriately improve your writing? several times.
sequenced events,
include some details
regarding what
happened, use
temporal words to
signal event order,
and provide some
sense of closure.
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Learning Experiences
What learning engagements will drive inquiry and lead to the development of unit understandings?
Copy these icons into the next section of the planner to indicate the purpose of each of the learning engagements. Note:
One learning engagement may represent more than one phase of inquiry.
Planning for Learner
Inquiry
UKS Focus Learning Experiences Variability/
Phase
Assessments
S11:With guidance Students will edit and critique their own writing, peers' Foster collaboration and
and support from writing, example pieces, and the teacher's writing examples community through
adults, use a variety throughout the unit. Invite students to reflect on the power of creating a safe space for
of digital tools to the editing, revising, and peer review. This can be done students to take risk and
produce and publish through a writing conference with the teacher or through a embrace their vulnerability
writing, including in quick turn and talk with a classmate. as writers
collaboration with
peers. Use guiding question:
4e. How does revising and editing a rough draft help Reduce media specific
S12: Describe people, strengthen a piece of writing? barriers by allowing
places, things, and 4f. Why is it valuable to have peers review writing before students to choose how
events with relevant publishing? to help focus conversations. they want to publish their
details, expressing writing, Allow multiple
ideas and feelings Invite students to reflect on different ways we can publish our media such as text-
clearly. writing pieces. Students will brainstorm different ways to handwritten or digital,
publish their work and they will choose to publish their speech, and illustration
S13: Add drawings or writing pieces using various means to express themselves. based on student interest
other visual displays and needs
to descriptions when Writing Conferences
appropriate to clarify Students will participate in routine writing conferences with Formative Assessment:
ideas, thoughts, and the teacher. These conferences will focus on where they are at Keep the UKS focus for the
feelings. in the writing process, and the individualized support each unit in mind during
student needs. The teaching will begin to guide students individual writing
S14: Demonstrate towards understanding how the writing process can help conferences or small group
command of the them as writers. Students will also transfer the generalization instruction, Review student
conventions of realized throughout the unit into their own writing pieces. work, identify what
standard English students can already do
grammar and usage Students will reflect on question: well, and identify the next
when writing or 4g. Why do writers engage in a formal writing process? area of instruction, Students
speaking. as part of their summative task. will progress at different
rates in their growth and
S15: Demonstrate development as writers
command of the
conventions of
standard English
capitalization,
punctuation, and
spelling when
writing
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International
Reflection
To what extent did students develop their knowledge, skills, and understanding?
How was this demonstrated?
How did students transfer understanding?
What changes would you recommend if this unit were taught again?
Original planning template developed by Erickson & Lanning. This version is modified with
permission to a Concept-Based Inquiry approach © French & Marschall, 2017
Unit author Ashley Hill © 2022 Professional Learning International